Praise of Incomparability

Envying not the distinguished, despising not the lowly, competing not with equals you attained
pre-eminence in the world.

Your devotion was to the causes of virtue, not to their results. Therefore, by means of your
perfect way of conduct the virtues attained in you their culmination.

You raised yourself to such a height by good actions that even the dust of your feet became
a receptable of merit.

Your faults were diminished and extirpated, your virtues enlarged and purified; by this wise
conduct you reached supreme attainment.

You struck at faults with all your might so that not even their Impressions remained in your
soul-series.

Virtues you continually accumulated in yourself so that not even a likeness thereof is found
in any other.

Every wordly material for comparison is subject to injury and obscuration, limited in time and
place, attained very easily.

What likeness indeed could there be to your virtues, unrivalled, unapproachable, lasting, turning
not aside, unsurpassed?

The depth of the salt ocean becomes shallow as a puddle when the unfathomable, boundless depth
of your wisdom is beheld.

The firm weight of the earth becomes light as the tip of a śirīṣa filament when compared with
your firmness which nothing in nature can shake.

Before the light of your knowledge, O Sage, which destroys the darkness of ignorance, the sun
does not even attain the level of a firefly.

The purity of moon, sky, and water in autumn become as if sullied when set against the purity
of your words, mind, and actions.

In naming these I have named every worldly good; for the paltry elements of the world are far
removed from the elements of the Buddha.

Only to that jewel of the Law, by the gain of which you gained preeminence, do you bear resemblance,
O Kindly One, and only it resembles you.

But where something with a hint of similarity is adduced by way of comparison with you, being
merely the delusion of a man's own wish, that is great wantonness on the part of the speaker.

