Praise of Speech

Well worded yet of great significance, true yet sweet, their meaning profound or plain or both
together, condensed or copious as they are, who after hearing such utterances of yours
would not be convinced, though he were your adversary, that you knew all things?

(See previous verse)

Generally your speech was wholly sweet; when necessary it was somewhat otherwise; but every
word of yours was well said because it achieved its purpose.

Every saying of yours, whether smooth or harsh or possessed of both those qualities, takes on,
when pounded down (in the mind), a single flavour.

Ah! the surpassing skill of your most pure actions by which this vessel of word-jewels was made
after such a fashion!

For from this mouth of yours, pleasing to the eye, this your most ear-entrancing speech drops
like nectar flowing from the moon.

Your speech is as a rain cloud laying the dust of passion, as a garuḍa exterminating the snake
of hatred.

It is like the sun again and again thrusting aside the darkness of ignorance, like Śakra's weapon
splitting the mountains of pride.

Free of falsehood because based on knowledge, free of confusion because of the absence of impurity,
easily understood because rightly applied, your speech is trebly excellent.

Just at first your words ravish the hearers' minds; then, being pondered, remove their passions
and ignorance.

Your words are adapted to all, cheering the afflicted, striking terror into the heedless, alarming
the lovers of pleasure.

These words of yours are for all; they please the wise, strenghten the intelligence of the middle
sort, and dispel the darkness of the slow-witted.

Your sayings draw men away from false opinions, draw them to nirvāṇa, draw out their faults,
rain down virtues.

Your intelligence is in all things unhampered, your mindfulness is in all things present; therefore
no prophecy of yours in any matter fails of result.

Because you make no move at the wrong time or in the wrong place or towards the wrong person,
therefore your words, like energy rightly applied, are not in vain.

