Praise of Causes

Having shaken off the doubt 'can it be done or not?', of your own accord you took this helpless
world under your protection.

Uncommissioned you were kind, you were fond without a reason, a friend to strangers, a kinsman
where there was no family tie (?).

You gave even your own flesh. What need to speak of other things? Even with your life-breath,
O Kindly One, you gratified the suppliant.

A hundred times you ransomed with your body and life the bodies and lives of living creatures
in the grip of their would-be slayers.

Not from fear of the Evil Way nor seeking after the Desirable Way but from mere purity of heart
you made righteousness your habit.

By ever spurning the crooked, by ever adhering to the straight, you became the single repository
of pure actions.

Tormented often, in the nobility of your heart you displayed your fiery power against impurities
but took pity on the impure.

Not such could be the delight of living creatures in recovering life lost as was yours when
you gave up life for others' sake.

That pity, Lord, which, regardless of pain though cut in pieces, you often showed even to murderous
beings, that seed of full enlightenment, your jewel of mind, only you know its essence,
O Brave One! The rest are far therefrom.

(See previous verse)

The place hard of attainment is not won without deeds hard of performance; thus thinking, you
fostered Energy without regard for self.

The loftiness of your excellences was never lowered; hence in you the rising scale of excellences
was abolished.

There was no attachment even to very pleasant and fruitful meditations for you who were ever
constrained by the great pity in your heart.

That pleasure which, though excellent, is not shared with others hurts rather than helps such
as you, O Righteous One!

From the mingled you took the essence; good speech, free of impurity, you drank entire; evil
speech you shunned like poison.

Purchasing good words even with your life, O Knower of the worth of jewels, you were zealous
for enlightenment in birth after birth.

Thus, striving so through three incalculable periods of time, partnered only by your resolution,
you gained the supreme place.

