Praise of Freedom from Debt

I know not the way by which recompense might be made to you; even those who have attained parinirvāṇa
are not free of debt to you.

Although these stand in your Law, it is their own welfare that they work; but your toil for
their sake - how should there be any requital thereof?

For looking upon the hearts of the sleepers you awaken them, the kind and heedful friend of
heedless beings.

The destruction of sins was declared, the delusion of Māra was laid open, the evil nature of
the saṃsāra was told, the region free from fear was shown.

What else could one anxious for the good of living creatures and pitying them find to do in
which you have not led the way?

If these qualities were transferable you would assuredly have bestowed them upon all, even upon
Devadatta.

That is why, O Protector of the world, you told the world this truth 'Here one governs not another'
as if expounding grammar.

Having for a long time promoted the Good Law on earth out of pity for the world, having raised
up many worthy disciples able to help the three worlds, and having trained your personal
converts ending with Subhadra, what yet remains to you of your debt to living creatures?

(See previous verse)

Powdering your bones into tiny particles with the diamond of samādhi, you did not even at the
end give up your habit of performing most arduous works.

'My Body of Law and my Body of Form both exist for others' sake.' Thus even in nirvāṇa you taught
this unbelieving world.

For thus, having transferred your Body of Law in its entirety to the virtuous and having split
your Body of Form into tiny fragments, you attained parinirvāṇa.

What steadfastness! What conduct! What form! What virtues! There is nothing in the properties
of the Buddha which is not wonderful.

Even to you, beneficent, beautiful, tranquil in speech and action, are men hostile. Behold the
fierceness of stupidity!

Those beings who honour you, the ocean of merit, the treasure store of jewels, the heap of properties,
the mine of virtues, even upon them is homage well bestowed.

Your virtues are unfailing, O Lord, but my capacity may fail; therefore I stop short for fear
of halting, not because I am satisfied.

Only you yourself can know yourself who are beyond measure, beyond number, beyond thought, beyond
comparison.

Not even a part of a fraction of your virtues has been celebrated and yet there is great gladness
in my heart; without diminishing the waters of a mighty lake the thirsts of men are
appeased.

By the fruit arising from this good work of mine which is the product of a wit derived from
faith in the Sage, may the mind of all living things, now tossed about on the wild winds of
evil thoughts, be brought to docility.

